## A. What is the Socratic Method?
{% include "components/go-back.liquid", text:hyperlinks.goToTop[page.lang] %}

The Socratic method is a process of dialogue and reasoning based on the confrontation of opposing ideas through the exchange of questions and answers. In the adaptation presented in this guide, the participants aim to delve into a topic, not with the intention of winning a debate, but to collectively reach a clearer and more consensual understanding of the issue being discussed. Each question posed and each answer given leads to deeper reflection, allowing a conclusion to be collaboratively constructed with the contributions of all participants in the discussion.

The Socratic method has been widely used in education since antiquity. It features in the Platonic dialogues, where Plato, in his own way, recreates the conversations that his teacher Socrates had with others to analyze philosophical and political topics. Instead of imparting knowledge in a unidirectional way through the teacher’s exposition, this adaptation of the Socratic method seeks to reach consensus through dialogue. In this process, the teacher, workshop leader, or facilitator has the role of guiding the formulation of questions and helping to validate the answers.

One of the greatest strengths of the Socratic method is that it fosters critical thinking. Participants are encouraged not only to question their own ideas but also to consider the perspectives of others. In this way, the Socratic process enhances the ability to analyze, reflect, and respect diverse opinions, as each person can contribute their own perspective. This approach also promotes introspection, as it invites participants to examine their own points of view and remain open to revising them as a result of collective dialogue.

By its nature, this method is particularly valuable for developing conflict resolution skills, as it teaches participants not only to engage in dialogue and listen actively but also to address disagreements in a constructive manner. The Socratic process transforms differences of opinion into opportunities for mutual understanding, creating a space where solutions are not imposed but collectively built. In this way, participants learn to negotiate and reach consensus with the goal of resolving conflicts peacefully and respectfully.
