## Introduction

{% guideFirstImage "The educational guide presented here is one of the products of the research project “<em>Irene</em>: A Workbook based on Classical Literature for Conflict Resolution.” This project was developed by an interdisciplinary team with the aim of integrating the teaching of the subject of peace education into secondary education institutions in Colombia. The <em>Irene</em> project uses classical texts from Greek and Roman literature as educational tools that promote critical reflection, constructive dialogue, and peaceful conflict resolution. This guide focuses on an adaptation of the Socratic method to be applied in various contexts. We propose a methodology of debate that does not focus on determining who is right, but rather on the search for consensus in an environment that encourages respect for the diversity of opinions and the collective construction of solutions." %}

The purpose of the guide is to engage participants in a dialogue process that will allow them to address different types of conflicts (interpersonal, social, political) and develop essential skills for peaceful coexistence, empathy, and critical thinking. Originally designed for the school environment, the material can be used in a wide variety of settings. Teachers, workshop leaders, or facilitators can implement it in diverse contexts where the goal is to foster dialogue based on the dialectical principles of the Socratic method, adapted for conflict resolution.

The *Irene* project and this guide, in particular, highlight the importance of the humanities as a valuable means of addressing contemporary issues such as peace, justice, and coexistence. Their focus on human nature and on understanding of contexts can contribute to social transformation.

The development of this project has been made possible thanks to the financial support of the Universidad de La Sabana, King’s College London, Universidade do Estado do Amazonas, and the UK’s Arts and Humanities Research Council (AHRC), all institutions committed to promoting peace and education through transdisciplinary approaches.

We invite you to freely use this material in printed or digital form. We also encourage its adaptation to meet the needs of your context, in which case we kindly ask you to cite the project: “*Irene*: A Workbook based on Classical Literature for Conflict Resolution (HUM-13-2024).” Additionally, we would love to receive your questions, comments, feedback, and audiovisual evidence of its implementation, which we can share on the project’s website and social media. Your contributions will help improve the guide, spread the adaptation of the Socratic method, and foster an exchange of valuable experiences and best practice. Please send your contributions via https://proyectoirene.pages.dev/ or @irene_paz_col on Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter.

Thank you for your collaboration as we continue building together!
